There are two things that we can do. I
think one thing is a little bit easier
and one thing is a little bit harder.
And the first thing is you just have to
have the actual law enforcement
infrastructure to make this possible.
And again, I think that we should treat
people humanely. I think we have an
obligation to treat people humanely. Uh
but I do think that a lot of these
illegal immigrants have to go back to
where they came from. And uh that
requires more law enforcement officers.
It requires more beds at deportation
facilities. It just requires more of the
basic nuts and bolts of how you run a
law enforcement regime in the context of
deportation. And we that's one of the
main things in the big beautiful bill
that is moving through through Congress
right now uh is is more money for
immigration enforcement. That's what
that money is for to facilitate that
deportation infrastructure. There's a a
much more difficult question and I think
you see the president's frustration. And
I've obviously expressed public
frustration on this, which is yes,
illegal immigrants by virtue of being in
the United States are entitled to some
due process. Okay. But the due process
under a legislative stand to to be
clear, yes, this is based on
legislation. It's not based on like the
judges who are making these decisions
are not inventing this standard. It is a
legislative standard. But the the the
amount of process that is due and how
you enforce those legislative standards
and how you actually bring them to bear
is is I think very much an open
question. And I think that what you've
seen and I I remember when I was in law
school there were all of these people
who were wanting to become immigration
lawyers and there was almost a certain
buzz around immigration law at the time
because there was so much gray area.
There was so much open space where the
courts would interpret how to apply
these rules. Now in the context of the
United States in 2011 2012 13 when I was
in law school we had you know
significant illegal immigration but not
that much there was this idea that you
could use the asylum claim process and
you could use the refugee uh process and
you could use all of these other tools
of the immigration enforcement regime to
actually make it harder to to deport
illegal aliens. And then what happened
is a lot of very wellunded NOS's went
about the process of making it much
harder to deport illegal aliens. And
that's what we inherited in the year of
our Lord 2025 is a whole host of legal
rules and in some cases um you know not
even legal rules as much as arguments
that had made by leftwing nos that
hadn't actually been ruled on by the
courts yet.
>> Right. And what we're finding, of
course, is that a small but substantial
number of courts are just making it very
very hard for us to uh to deport illegal
aliens. And you know, Steven Miller, who
of course is sort of our our immigration
in the White House, a good friend of
mine, you know, he's he's thinking of
all of these different and new statutory
authorities, right? Because there are a
lot of different statutory authorities
the president has to enforce the
nation's immigration laws. And there is
candidly frustration on the White House
side that we think that the law is very
clear. We think the president has
extraordinary plenary power. Yes, you
have to you have you need some process
to confirm that these illegal aliens are
in fact illegal aliens, not American
citizens.
>> But that it's not like we're just
throwing that process out. We're trying
to comply with it as much as possible
and actually do the job that we were
left. And I let me just make one one
final sort of philosophical point here.
>> You know, I worry that unless the
Supreme Court steps in here or unless
the district courts
exercise a little bit more discretion,
we we are running into a a real conflict
between two important principles in the
United States. You know, principle one,
of course, is that courts interpret the
law. I think principle two is that the
American people decide how they're
governed. Right? That's the fundamental
small D democratic principle that's at
the heart of the American project. I
think that you are seeing and I I know
this is inflammatory, but I think you
are seeing an effort by the courts to
quite literally overturn the will of the
American people. And to be clear, it's
not most courts, but I I think what the
the Supreme Court has to do, and I I saw
an interview with Justice Robert, Chief
Justice Roberts recently where he said
>> its job is to u uh obviously decide
cases, but in the course of that uh
check the excesses of Congress or of the
uh executive and that does require
degree of independence.
>> Yeah. The the role of the court is to
check the excesses of the executive. I
thought that was a profoundly wrong
sentiment. That's one half of his job.
The other half of his job is to check
the excesses of his own branch. And you
you cannot have a country where the
American people keep on electing
immigration enforcement and the courts
tell the American people they're not
allowed to have what they voted for. And
that's where we are right now. We're
going to keep working it through the
immigration court process through the
Supreme Court as much as possible. And
look, success to me is not so much a
number, though. Obviously, I'd love to
see the gross majority of the illegal
immigrants who came in under Biden
deported. That that actually is a
secondary metric of success. Success to
me is that we have established a set of
rules and principles that the courts are
comfortable with and that we have the
infrastructure to do that allows us to
deport large numbers of illegal aliens
when large numbers of illegal aliens
come into the country. That to me is
real success. But I think whether we're
able to get there is a function of
course of of our efforts but also of the
courts themselves,
>> right? But it seems like the stable way
to get there where you are creating a
settlement that would outlast your own
administration, right, would involve a
combination of Supreme Court rulings.
And I think it's fair to say that there
is a majority on the Supreme Court that
is likely to be sympathetic to something
other than a left NGO reading of
immigration law. Would you That's right.
Okay. I I think I hope that's right. I
think that's likely. um
combined with perhaps a recognition that
maybe the legislative setup around this
issue is out of date.
>> The you know that the asylum system
assumed by legislation written in the
1950s doesn't make sense and so on.
Right? So there you have two two tracks.
You have trying to get Supreme Court
rulings that vindicate your
interpretation of the law and then you
have potentially legislative efforts
where the existing law needs to be
revised. But your but your
administration just just there's a third
track too which is using existing legal
authorities that haven't been used in
the past but we think are there
>> and this is what I'm asking about the
legal authorities that you guys have
tried to use have been the particular
one is the alien enemies act right which
is an extremely aggressive claim about
wartime powers that as far as I can tell
even under the most aggressive
interpretation is likely to apply only
to an incredibly small number of
migrants, right? You're not the claim is
not actually that, you know, 5 million
migrants here illegally are in a state
of war against the United States. Or is
that the claim?
>> No, it's not that 5 million um are
engaged in like military conflict, but
that the I I I take issue that it's an
aggressive interpretation. So, let me
let me back up and and take some issue
with the the premise. I don't think that
the supposition, if you look at the
history and the context of those laws,
is that for something to be an invasion,
you have to have like five million
uniformed combatants. Yes, we don't have
5 million uniform combatants, but Ross,
I mean, this this is where I think I
have to be careful here. Um, cuz some of
this information, of course, is is is,
you know, uh, classified, but
[sighs and gasps] think how to put this
point. I think that the courts need to
be somewhat differential. In fact, I
think the design is that they should be
extremely differential to these
questions of political judgment made by
the people's elected president of the
United States. Because when you say,
well, there aren't 5 million people who
are waging war. Okay. But are there
thousands, maybe tens of thousands of
people? And then when you take their
extended family, their networks, is it
much larger than that, who are quite
dangerous people, um, who I think very
intentionally came to the United States
to cause violence or to at least profit
from violence and they're fine if
violence is an incidental effect of it.
Yeah, I I do, man. And I and I and I
think the the people underappreciate the
level of public safety stress that we're
under when the president talks about how
bad crime is. You know, the the the one
thing I'd love for the American media to
do a little bit more is is really go to
a migrant community where you have say
60% legal immigrants and 40% illegal
immigrants. the level of chaos, the
level of violence, the level of I I
think truly
pre-odern
brutality that some of these communities
have gotten used to.
Whatever law was written, I think it
vests us with the power to take very
serious action against this. It's bad.
It's bad. It's worse than people
appreciate. And it's not, you know,
Donald Trump. I know you most of your
listeners probably hate, you know, the
the president I serve under probably
hate me. maybe not your listeners, but a
lot of New York Times readers, but but
we'll talk about that. We'll talk about
that question in a minute. I would just
ask them like do not filter this through
the I see President Trump and Vice
President Vance up there and I sort of
immediately assume that they're lying to
me or that they're motivated by some bad
value. This is not sustainable. It's And
it's not just sustainable like, oh, this
is more immigrants than we we used to
have. This is a level of
>> invasion that I that I think our laws we
already have laws to help us deal with
and I wish uh the courts were more
differential and we're going to see
again this is we're we're very early
innings in the court process and even
you know some of the the the worst
capital W worst Supreme Court decisions
that have been made on on you know the
media says oh this is a big blow to the
administration. I mean a lot of these
things are very narrow procedural
rulings. I think that we're very early
innings here on what the court is going
to interpret the law to mean,
>> right? Shouldn't this sort of barbaric
medieval landscape that you're
describing show up in violent crime
statistics?
>> Oh, sometimes no. Because the people who
are most victimized by this, Ross,
they're not running to the FBI. They're
not running to the local police. Okay.
>> But but certainly, I mean, if if if you
look at
>> I mean, hell, look at the number of
people dying of fentanyl overdoses. Um,
again, just go substantively, you know,
qualitatively, you go to these
communities and you see what they're
dealing with. I I I I really think that
we underappreciate just how violent, you
know, these cartels are and how much,
you know, they they've made life, I
think, pretty unbearable for, frankly, a
lot of nativeorn American citizens, but
also a lot of legal American migrants,
especially those along the southern
border. So to get I guess to to get
quickly to my idea of a zone of
temptation here, right, for you. Well,
so what what you're describing is again,
you and I both live through the Bush
presidency, right? And there are
elements of what you might call a kind
of war on terror mentality. Yeah.
>> Visav that you're taking visav the
cartels or people associated with the
cartels or people allegedly associated
with gangs and cartels. That seems to me
similar to the approach taken to anyone
associated with Islamic terrorism and so
on in the aftermath of September of
September 11th. And again, you remember
and I remember that in not in more than
a few cases, right? This ended up with
situations where the US was taking
people into custody and remanding them
to black sites and so on who turned out
unsurprisingly not to be number one
al-Qaeda terrorists. Right. Yes.
>> And to the extent that it is possible,
and it is somewhat difficult for the
media to do this, but to the extent that
it's possible for the media to examine
the kind of figures and individuals that
you guys have been trying to essentially
remand to prison in El Salvador, right,
without, you know, extensive legal
process. It just seems like this system
is ripe for war on terrorist style
abuses where you are going to be sending
people to prison in El Salvador that
advertises itself as a terrible place
and some of those one some of those
people are probably going to be
innocent. Two, some of them are going to
be people who have committed a crime who
have some kind of gang affiliation but
who under normal American law,
nonwartime law would end up going to
jail for 6 months or a year or
something. And again, they're going to
disappear potentially into a system for
a decade or more or something like that.
And that just seems like you are
creating a context where injustice is
inevitable even if your intentions are,
you know, are just to bring peace and
order to communities along the border or
anything else.
Well, [sighs and gasps] look, first of
all, I understand your point and
making these judgments if you take the
teachings of our faith seriously. They
are hard, right? I'm not I'm not going
to pretend that I haven't struggled with
some of this, that I haven't thought
about whether, you know, we're we're
doing the precisely right thing. Um, so
so it's it's a fair point, and I I know
that you think you've you've got me
trapped here. I don't think I have you.
No, I'm not. [laughter] All right, let
let me let me be perfectly I'm not
interested in in having you trapped.
We're having a conversation in Rome as a
journalist and a vice president, but
also as two Catholics and I'm giving you
Ross. Trust me, I I think it's to
be clear. I think it's a totally fair
question.
>> I'm interested in what politics does to
people to to
>> Okay, your soul. Yes, of course. So,
number one, the concern that you raise
is fair. Okay. The concern that you
raise is fair. there there has to be
some way in which you're asking yourself
as you go about enforcing the law even
to your point against some very
dangerous people that you're enforcing
the law consistent with you know the
Catholic Church's moral dictates and so
forth and also to be clear I'm the vice
>> also well and also I mean
>> after [snorts] that
American law and basic principles
>> most important most importantly American
law
>> but we're talking about you know we're
in Rome and so that's why I brought up
the
>> Cath flag is positioned behind you
>> for sure um So here's here's the thing.
So with a caveat that I'm the vice
president of the United States and I am
hardly an expert in every single edge
case or every single case that has
become a viral sensation or that people
have criticized us over. But I I am you
know pretty well read on some of the
cases. Typically what I find when I look
at the worst cases, I mean the the ones
that the media seems so preoccupied
with, I make a couple of observations
about it. Number one, uh it is hard to
take seriously. Now, this doesn't
absolve me from taking from from doing
my my duty as an American leader and
hopefully as a Christian leader, too.
But it is hard to take seriously the
extraordinarily
emotive condemnations of people who
don't care about the problem that I'm
trying to solve and that the president
is trying to solve. That's not you. It's
why I take I actually take your concerns
seriously. You'd be I listen to most of
your podcasts. I read most of your
columns. So when when I see people who
for legitimately four years told me that
I was a xenophobe for thinking that what
Joe Biden was doing at the border was a
serious problem, um I I am less willing
there there's there's a witness element
to this and I'm less willing to believe
the witness of people who are now saying
that this MS-13 gang member, and we'll
talk about that case in a second, this
guy, this guy is somehow a very
sympathetic person and you violated his
civil rights.
etc., etc. Okay, so that that's number
one. Number two, I still have an
obligation to think about these cases
and I'll tell you, you know, a lot of
times I'll read about these cases and
I'll reach out to the people who are
enforcing immigration law and I'll try
to find out what exactly is going on.
I haven't asked every question about
every case, but the ones where I have
asked questions and I try to get to the
bottom of what's going on, I feel quite
comfortable what's happened. And the one
that I spent the most time understanding
is the one of the, you know, the
Maryland father. And you know what what
what I found so bizarre about that case
is that the American media
took one line and I I forget what it
what what line it was, but it
acknowledged some error had happened in
a Department of Justice filing without
actually asking the two most important
questions. What is the nature of the
error? And much more importantly than
that, what is the remedy for an error?
Both as a matter of law, most
importantly as the vice president, but
also again as a matter of Christian
principle. I I think this guy was not
just a gang member, but a reasonably
high level gang member in MS-13. I think
he had engaged in some pretty ugly
conduct.
Legally, he had had multiple hearings
before an immigration judge. He had a
valid deportation order. What he also
had was a sort of exception, what's
called a withholding order that
basically said, "Yes, you can deport
this guy. No one doubts that we could
have deported this guy, but you can't
deport this guy to El Salvador because
of particular conditions that obtained
in, I believe, 2019 when his case was
adjudicated. So, you fast forward to
2025, we deport this guy. The courts
hold that we've made a mistake and then
eventually it gets to the Supreme Court.
And I believe, and we're getting into
the weeds a little bit of the legal
technicalities, but I believe the court
term is you must facilitate his return.
And I sat in lunch with Blly, the leader
of El Salvador, with the president of
the United States, and with others, and
talked about this case, and Blly
basically said, I don't want to send
this guy back. I think he's a bad guy. I
want him in an he's my citizen. He's in
a prison in El Salvador and I think
that's where he belongs. And our
attitude was, okay, what are we really
going to do? Are we going to exert
extraordinary diplomatic pressure to
bring a guy back to the United States
who is a citizen of a foreign country
who we had a valid deportation order
with? And again, you you may say that
the the judgments that we made here, I I
understand there may be disagreements
about the judgments that we made here,
but there's just something that it's
hard to take serious when so many of the
people who are saying we made a terrible
error here are the same people who made
no protests about how this guy got into
the country in the first place or what
Joe Biden did for four years to the
American southern border. In that
meeting, the other thing that the
president of the United States said was
that he hoped or aspired to a situation
where he could potentially send American
citizens to El Salvador's prison. The
worst also said explicitly he would
follow the law and would follow American
courts on this. So, I I think it's
unreasonable for the president to say,
"Here's this thing I'd like to do so
long as it's consistent with the law."
I think that you should be able to see
though why in the context of sending
illegal immigrants to an El Salvador in
prison and claiming to be unable for
diplomatic reasons to bring them back.
The prospect of then saying, "And we'd
like to send US citizens to that
prison," would raise some concerns about
how the administration uses the
immigration powers that you think it
should have under arguable wartime
conditions. again, right? Like
>> regardless of regardless of the
particulars of of a case, let's you
know, regardless of the particulars of a
case, it just seems like you are setting
up a machinery
that people of good faith who are not
hostile to your policies would
reasonably regard as dangerous to
particular people who are caught up in
the system. That's all. Look, I I I I
understand the point, especially as
it's, you know, what the president says
or what I say is refracted through the
lens of an American press that, you
know, I have my complaints with. But
what but just what what did the
president again? I, you know, I I'm
going to defend my boss here. Um, what
did he say? I'm going to think about
doing this only in cases of the very
very worst people. number one and number
two only it's if it's consistent with
American law. I think that if if that
was the headline that was reproduced the
president is considering sending the
very worst violent gang members in
America to a foreign prison so long as
that is a legal thing to do. I don't
think that would inspire so much
passionate resistance.